Almost every single person that has a substance use issue
has been traumatized emotionally or physically at some time in their life.
Usually it's stemming from childhood, but it can also happen from PTSD.
It can happen from violence against women. It can happen
for other types of violence, as well. Our clients on the Sunshine Coast,
Lower Sunshine Coast, Sechelt, Gibsons, Madeira Park, are from all walks
of life. We have people that are homeless,
sadly. We have people that are functioning perfectly well in society,
holding highly responsible jobs. It goes through all walks of life.
And, of course, the people that are functioning well in the community are
on opioid agonist treatment, which makes it possible for them to have their
needs met and to have a normal "life."
The stigma impacts clients in many different ways.
It can be through the emergency room where their needs aren't met,
often because the emergency room is so busy and
it's very complicated to deal with the persons using substances.
What I would like to see to reduce the stigma is
more understanding. Understanding leads to empathy, in my view, and empathy
leads to reduction of stigma. So often people
feel that people who're using substances can just stop what they're doing.
Why not quit? This is often asked. This is an incredibly complicated area.
The changes that happen in the brain are deep seated. Not in the
cerebrum, the conscious area of the brain, but deep seated in the
brain stem, diencephalon. And that's not accessible when
some trigger happens with these patients. They respond
with a fight or flight response that's ingrained in their brain because
of what they've dealt with in the previous years.
I think we have to develop trust. It's not going to happen right
away. That we actually do something to help them
and go the extra mile. If they need a form for something,
go and help them do the form. It shows them that we're actually
there for them, that we're trying to help and we will continue to
help them. It's a matter of building trust
by showing care is what I believe.